chore(flags): add more docs on using evaluation runtimes + evaluation tags (#13107)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/evaluation-runtimes-and-tags.md

---
title: How to use evaluation runtimes and tags together for fine-grained flag control
date: 2025-10-07
author:

>   - posthog

Reviewer: This is breaking the build
```suggestion
  - dylan-martin
```

**Scenario**: You're testing new pricing tiers, but only want to evaluate this in your billing service and checkout UI, not in every service and client.

**Configuration**:

- Runtime: `all`
- Evaluation tags: `["billing"]`

**Why both features?** The pricing affects both frontend (checkout UI) and backend (billing service), so runtime is `all`. But you don't want every service and client evaluating this flag thousands of times - only the specific parts that handle billing.

```javascript
// Checkout UI component - Gets the flag
const posthog = new PostHog('KEY', {
    evaluation_environments: ['production', 'billing', 'web']
})

// Billing service - Gets the flag  
const posthog = new PostHog('KEY', {
    evaluation_environments: ['production', 'billing', 'api']
})

// Main app dashboard - Doesn't get the flag (no 'billing' tag)
const posthog = new PostHog('KEY', {
    evaluation_environments: ['production', 'dashboard', 'web']
})
```

## Best practices when combining features

### Use runtime for security boundaries

Set runtime to `server` for flags containing:

- Sensitive business logic
- Rate limits or quotas
- Infrastructure settings

### Layer tags for precise control

> Remember that tags use OR logic: `["staging", "checkout"]` matches ANY staging OR ANY checkout. For AND logic, use compound tags like `["staging-checkout"]`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember that tags use OR logic: `["staging", "checkout"]` matches evaluation environments with `staging` OR `checkout`. For AND logic, use compound tags like `["staging-checkout"]`.
```

Evaluation tags add environment-based constraints that determine when a flag should be evaluated:

- Flags only evaluate when the SDK provides matching environment tags
- At least one tag must match for the flag to be included
- Flags without evaluation tags evaluate for all requests (backward compatibility)

This helps with cost optimization, environment isolation, and better organization of your flags.

## How they work together

These features apply as sequential filters in the evaluation pipeline:

1. **Runtime filter first**: Excludes flags based on the SDK type (client vs server)
2. **Tag filter second**: Further filters based on environment context

Think of it as a two-stage security checkpoint:

- Runtime checks if you have the right type of ID (client or server)
- Tags check if you're going to the right destination (production, staging, etc.)

### Example filtering flow

Consider a flag with:

- Runtime: `server`
- Evaluation tags: `["production", "api"]`

Here's what happens in different scenarios:

| SDK Type | Environment Tags | Result |
|----------|-----------------|--------|
| JavaScript Web | `["production", "web"]` | ❌ Blocked by runtime (client SDK) |

> | Node.js | `["staging", "api"]` | ❌ Blocked by tags (no "production") |

Author: yeah, you're right.

> | Node.js | `["staging", "api"]` | ❌ Blocked by tags (no "production") |

Reviewer 3: This is still outstanding

   - Select which tags should act as evaluation constraints

### Step 2: Configure your SDKs

Update your SDK initialization to include evaluation environments. Here's how to set it up for different scenarios:

**Production API server (Node.js):**

```javascript
const posthog = new PostHog('YOUR_API_KEY', {
    host: 'https://app.posthog.com',
    evaluation_environments: ['production', 'api', 'backend']
})
```

**Production web app (React):**

```jsx
<PostHogProvider 
    apiKey='YOUR_API_KEY'
    options={{
        api_host: 'https://app.posthog.com',
        evaluation_environments: ['production', 'web', 'frontend']
    }}
>
    <App />
</PostHogProvider>
```

**Staging microservice (Python):**

```python
posthog = Posthog(
    'YOUR_API_KEY',
    host='https://app.posthog.com',
    evaluation_environments=['staging', 'payments-service', 'backend']
)
```

## Common use cases

### 1. Sensitive server-only features with environment isolation

**Scenario**: Database migration flags that should never leak to clients and only run in specific environments.

**Configuration**:

- Runtime: `server`
- Evaluation tags: `["production", "migration-runner"]`

> **Result**: Only server-side SDKs in production with the "migration-runner" tag can evaluate this flag.

Reviewer 3: This sounds like it implies an AND relationship, but above it is stated:
> At least one tag must match for the flag to be included

Author: you're so right. The relation is OR'd within the array, so I'll update.

```javascript
// Migration service
const posthog = new PostHog('KEY', {
    evaluation_environments: ['production', 'migration-runner']
})

// This service can evaluate the migration flag
const shouldRunMigration = await posthog.isFeatureEnabled('db-migration-v2')
```

### 2. Platform-specific client features

> **Scenario**: Mobile-only features that should work differently in staging vs production.

Reviewer 3: Same goes for this. Considering we only need a single tag to match, we can't guarantee a match only on environment if we also provide platform tags.

**Configuration**:

- Runtime: `client`
- Evaluation tags: `["mobile", "ios"]`

**Production iOS app:**

```swift
// Production iOS app gets the flag
posthog.setup(apiKey: "KEY", host: "https://app.posthog.com", 
              evaluationEnvironments: ["production", "mobile", "ios"])
```

**Staging iOS app:**

```swift
// Staging iOS app doesn't get this flag (missing "production" tag)

> posthog.setup(apiKey: "KEY", host: "https://app.posthog.com",
>               evaluationEnvironments: ["staging", "mobile", "ios"])

Reviewer 3: Presence of `mobile` and `ios` could also match e.g. `production`, `mobile`. Maybe just tag it staging?
````suggestion
              evaluationEnvironments: ["staging"])
````

```

### 3. Cross-platform features with environment control

**Scenario**: New checkout flow that needs testing across web and mobile, but only in staging.

**Configuration**:

- Runtime: `all`

> - Evaluation tags: `["staging", "checkout"]`

Reviewer 3: > only in staging

Given the presence of `checkout`, this would also match a flag tagged as `production`, `checkout`.

> This allows both client and server SDKs to evaluate the flag, but only in staging environments with checkout functionality.

Author: yeah, I was trying a bit too hard to provide contrived examples here.
